---
layout: post
title: We've finally made it - from bucket to bokashi to 3 compost bins
type: news
categories:
- red-ant-stuff
author: Ben Still
image:
  small: /assets/uploads/2012/08/compost-bin-465x309.jpg
  big: /assets/uploads/2012/08/compost-bin.jpg
meta:
  description: A whirlwind tale of Red Ant's journey through the wonderful world of composting.
  dsq_thread_id: '824121150'
  focus_keywords: compost bins
excerpt:
  short: "Green offices of the present future: office composting."
  long: This week we reached a major milestone in our business - something we're all very excited about. Finally, after years of hard work and dedication, and several wrong turns along the way, we've got there.
---

We've just bought our second compost bin, to sit alongside our
existing
bin and worm farm.

To put this in perspective, some history. Like most good things, it
starts with coffee.

Back in the day, when we were working in a ridiculously large but
trendy
warehouse space on [Randle street (Google
maps)](http://goo.gl/maps/oydZB), we had a bucket. We needed the
bucket
once we bought our first coffee machine, and then realised we needed
somewhere to put the grinds. However, our trendy space was so cool and
hip that it lacked a sink- or a kitchen. So we settled on a bucket.

The bucket's demise began when people started emptying out the water
from the coffee machine, and the bucket began to get more liquid and
contain all manner of scraps. This went on for a while, and the bucket
became more and more disgusting.

Things came to a head when I started finding teaspoons in our toilet.
I
was sure someone must be shooting up in there - I wasn't really sure
how
to deal with that from an HR perspective (did we say anywhere in our
contracts that it wasn't cool to shoot up during lunch?). No one
seemed
to be nodding off at their computers or acting odd.

It turned out that our cleaner was tipping the entire bucket down the
toilet and then flushing it. And occasionally there was a spoon in the
bucket. Everything else was flushed away, but the spoon remained.
Those
guys don't do our cleaning any more.

Our next office had a kitchen, but we needed somewhere for food scraps
and coffee grounds. So on the advice of a friend, we got a [Bokashi
(Bokashi composting on
Wikipedia)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bokashi_composting#Bokashi_composting).
For those of you unfamiliar with the Bokashi concept, the idea is that
you have this completely sealed small tub that you put food waste
into,
and then sprinkle some special magic Bokashi powder over, and the
scraps
get dissolved by all the special bacteria in the Bokashi powder. Or
something like that. The supposed advantage being none of the smell of
compost and good for small spaces. Sure.

Things didn't quite work out like that - maybe our powder was out of
date or something. We filled the tub in a week or so, and pretty soon
the scraps turned into this dark grey gloop with the most incredible
stench. Opening the lid to put more food scraps in would release a
warm
gush of fetid stink, so pretty soon everyone learnt not to open it
under
any circumstances. I tried tipping a tiny bit out, diluting it with
water and putting it on some of our office plants. The next morning,
all
of our plants were dead.

So the Bokashi sat there for about a year, no one quite sure what to
do
with it. We were worried that moving it might cause an explosion or
toxic leak. But the longer we left it, the worse it got.

Finally, our problem was solved when we got our office repainted.
After
the job, the painter left some of his cans of paint in our kitchen,
and
then turned up with a mate a few days later to collect them. It seemed
they had decided to have a smoke of the peace pipe, and they turned up
extremely stoned. They carried out all of their paints, and loaded
them
into their van and drove off very very slowly. With our Bokashi.

So then we decided to get serious. No more messing around with buckets
or crazy systems - worms were the answer. We got a worm farm. The
worms
are little champions, but with limited capacity. With 28 people we
make
about 8 small buckets of scraps a week. And when that filled up we got
a
big compost bin to deal with extras. Now that has finally filled up,
so
were onto our second compost bin.

But somewhere out there, sitting in the back of a paint splattered van
amongst some cans of paint, sits the ticking time bomb of our Bokashi.
