---
layout: post
title: Fast follower strategy DOA?
permalink: /strategy/fast-follower-strategy-doa/
type: ideas
categories:
- strategy
- mobile
author: Ben Still
image:
  small: /assets/uploads/2013/09/cat-465x290.jpg
  big: /assets/uploads/2013/09/cat-465x290.jpg
meta:
  description: Fast follower is a strategy used to replicate successful products. Here are 5 reasons why it might not work out, based on our experience.
  focus_keywords: fast follower
excerpt:
  short: Five reasons why we think your fast follower strategy might not work out so well.
  long: Fast follower strategy is a term used to <a href="http://www.businessinsider.com.au/youre-better-off-being-a-fast-follower-than-an-originator-2010-10">describe the strategy</a> of some companies to look at what a rival is doing and come out quickly with a similar "follower" product, eventually overtaking the original product. It's the flip of that equally slick sounding strategy "first mover advantage", which gets used quite a bit around dotcom bubbles to justify ideas that no one needs.
---

There's an [interesting discussion by Hunter
Walk](http://hunterwalk.com/2013/09/09/has-mobile-killed-the-fast-follower-strategy-sure-looks-that-way/)
about fast follower strategy and whether mobile has been instrumental
in
killing it off. He outlines four reasons (which are mobile iOS
centric)
that make the whole fast follower approach a bit redundant.

As someone with experience both in making the thing that other
companies
want to copy, as well as being regularly asked to make copies of
existing things,* I don't think this is just a mobile issue*.

A fast follower strategy is very difficult to execute whether it is
specifically for mobile or not.

Here's why:

### 1. You're looking at V1. Theyre already on to V3

The version of the product you're looking at copying is V1. If their
product and dev team are on to it, they have already been working on a
Road Map, have a clear idea of key features, are wrapping up the next
iteration now and starting on the one after that. Make sure you don't
launch your V1 knockoff just as they wow customers with V3.

### 2. They've got customers

They've launched, and already have customers. These customers might be
paying them money. Turns out money is this thing that can be really
handy to buy more and bigger servers, get more developers, and make
things happen faster.

But - most important - they have real customers giving them real
feedback. They can see what real customers are doing, and have a
better
understanding of what they want.

### 3. It will take longer and more than you think

Yes, I totally get that you've read these blogs about coming up with
an
idea on Friday, build it in a weekend and your first orders are coming
in on Monday. Go Lean or go home. No, please don't send me the link. I
also get that [everyone is learning to
code](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2012/05/please-dont-learn-to-code.html)
so it must be really easy, right?

Back here on Planet Earth the reality is that most ideas take months
to
design, build and test. And these projects take a team of really
experienced people rather than one or two. And no I won't give you
commit privileges when you do finish your Get awesome at Rails on Ruby
in a week course.

### 4. They've hit potholes you haven't even seen yet

Looking at an online product from the outside, its easy to miss the
things which can suck a lot of time and energy. Things like payment
systems, messaging and support tools are some of the under the hood
stuff which might not be apparent, and you only really notice when
they
break. These are the things youll need to research, build and test.

### 5. you're probably not the only one

If you've had the idea, how many other people are working on the same
fast follow strategy already?

[![you are not alone](/assets/uploads/2013/09/cat.jpg "you are not
alone")](/assets/uploads/2013/09/cat.jpg)

**Groupon** launched. Six different companies asked us to build a
Groupon clone (which we didn't end up doing). Three of those went
live,
and I think only one is kind of hanging in there. The market has a way
of sorting this stuff out. Google [groupon
clone](https://www.google.com.au/search?&q=groupon+clone) to see just
how many different types of clones you can buy now. Weve had similar
requests for Gilt, Airbnb, Airtasker and others.

[**12WBT** launched (Michelle Bridges 12 Week Body
Transformation)](http://redant.com.au/blog/portfolio-item/michelle-bridges-12-week-body-transformation/).
Its been very successful. It keeps our team very busy. Copies seem to
pop up all the time, some last and some fizzle pretty quickly (10 week
body transformation anyone?).

While there are specific reasons why fast follow is a hard strategy to
execute for mobile iOS app development, I don't think it is a mobile
specific problem. If you're contemplating an existing idea, why not
focus on which problems they haven't solved?
