---
layout: post
title: Doing it on the small screen doesn't always mean a mobile App. Actually it probably shouldn't.
permalink: /mobile/mobile-apps-vs-mobile-site/
type: ideas
categories:
- mobile
- strategy
author: Ben Still
image:
  small: /assets/uploads/2013/09/mobile-join-465x305.jpg
  big: /assets/uploads/2013/09/mobile-join.jpg
meta:
  description: If you're making stuff for the web, mobile is a really big deal. It's really important to form and execute a mobile strategy well. Which can be hard.
  focus_keywords: mobile app
excerpt:
  short: Most of our projects now have over 50% mobile traffic. So mobile strategy is becoming increasingly important
  long: If you're making stuff for the web, mobile is a really big deal. Most of our projects have over 50% of visits from mobile, so it's really important to form and execute a mobile strategy well. Which can be hard.
---

Like many complex things, it can suffer from being over simplified.
Doing mobile well can occasionally get simplified to make a mobile App
and get it listed in the App store - tick. Make the site responsive -
tick. But what are the drawbacks or compromises? Are they really the
best options?

In my experience this simplification can stem from two factors. The
first is a misunderstanding about the differences between an App and a
mobile site. The second is what I call the Digital Marketing Bucket
List
of having an App.

### 1. What you can do on a mobile app that you can't do on a mobile
web site

Mobile is changing, and usage patterns are changing. We're now running
into users that don't have a PC or a landline phone and they don't
have
an internet account. Their whole online experience is via their mobile
phone and 4G network. And they are understandably pissed when we've
just
made them download 800Gb of video stream.

I was going to be witty and have this space has been left
intentionally
blank, but not everyone gets my humour. So, the answer is not much.
And
to clarify I'm talking about Apple iOS apps. Not so long ago there
were
quite a few things you could only do in an App- like upload images and
the speed was much better. Now that gap has closed, and there are only
a
few things left like accelerometer and music integration left.

In fact, when you're using an App, usually you're looking at HTML
pages
that are the exact same type of HTML that youd be looking at if you
we're viewing that content via a browser. Same CSS, same code, same
images. No special magic there. In fact as App developers we go to
great
pains to make HTML layouts and buttons look like the Apple interface -
when in fact it could be anything you fancy.

### 2. The digital marketing bucket list of having an App

Some people just expect that there is an App available. And there is
definitely merit in listening to your customers and providing your
product/service in the way they are expecting. But take some time to
listen carefully - are they actually asking for an App, or are they
asking for an icon that appears on their home screen? Clicking it
takes
me to your product/service.

If the icon on their home screen is what theyre after- great news:
that
takes about 10 min to set up. If they really want an App, take some
time
to research exactly what they'd like in it vs what you might already
have available. You might find that they're asking for features you
don't provide. So delivering those features via the App Store or via
carrier pigeon is kind of irrelevant- you need to do some product
planning.

[![tom_selleck_01](/assets/uploads/2013/09/tom_selleck_01-237x300.jpg
"tom_selleck_01")](/assets/uploads/2013/09/tom_selleck_01.jpg)

Dont get me wrong- \*\*creating a mobile App can be a perfect
strategic
fit. But taking a look at many of the current apps created by brands
and products to support their product/service, it is puzzling as to
why
they just didnt make a really good mobile web site.

[\*Business Insider - html5 phone apps have a
future\*](http://www.businessinsider.com/html5-phone-apps-have-a-future-2013-8)
